The poem "Ozymandias" is one of the best sonnets of Percy Bysshe Shelley. In this verse, Shelly explained his powerful king who struggled for his own estate throughout his life, and was so deeply involved in the global mission that he forgot his ultimate fate I will. In addition, Shelley will complete one day by recognizing that our earthly achievements, which are very important to us today, will remind the reader of their death. By drawing these brilliant and sarcastic pictures with different symbols in the reader's head, Shelly will attempt to show that no one in the world is eternally eternal or even their assets or property.

On the surface, Percy Bysshe Shelley's "Ozymandias" is a description of Shelley on the concept of Egyptian Faro called Ramses II (translated into Ozymandias in Greek). But more importantly, "Ozymandias" commented on the temporary nature of human beings' most hard work. Regardless of what he thinks, the Ozymandias empire will eventually disappear. Even the statue he made to strengthen the possibility of immortality will be broken. After Ozymandias 'great' declined, sculpture was a work of art that can last a long time. However, the statue expires soon and all the remaining wreckage is desert sand.

Comments on Essay.com / Percy Shelley's "Ozymandias" simple analysis and answer, and the temporal nature of human's most hard work

A brief analysis and answer to Percy Shelley's "Ozymandias", and a review of the temporal nature of the most diligent of mankind

In Shelley 's work, the statues of Ancient Egyptian Pharaoh Ramesses II or Oz - man Diaz symbolized political tyranny. In "Ozymandias" (1817), the statues were subdivided, left behind in the open desert, tyranny was temporary, and any political leader, in particular irregular political leaders, was hoped to last long There is no power or real influence. A broken monument also represents the decline of civilization and culture: after all, the statue is a human building, a work of art created by the creator, now it is - and its creator - all creatures As it will eventually be destroyed

The poem was spoken by the speaker who met with the traveler. And he told him about the statue of Ozymandias. More narrator created distances that weaken the power and authority of Ozymandias as king. He is only a part of the story. In Aristotle's imitative theory, the expression here is a "story". "Ozymandias" is mainly the product of Shelley's imagination and is not an attempt to reconstruct history. And there are many differences between the 12th and the description of Diodorus. This number was standing and not sitting, but found in the desert, not the entrance to the temple. Historian Diodorus portrays the image in an accurate and practical way. But Shelly used his imagination in poetry to describe the statue, but he liked it. Here, we can see the relationship between Aristotle 's thinking about the difference between history and poetry. He made some clear distinctions directly